there are things we say when we catch
the eye of a stranger or a neighbor
walking by we say hello how are you
it's beautiful day how you feel these
sound kind of meaningless right and in
some ways they are they have no semantic
meaning doesn't matter how you are or
what the day is like they have something
else they have social meaning what we
mean when we say those things is I see
you there
I'm obsessed with talking to strangers I
make eye contact say hello
I offer help I listen I get all kinds of
stories about 7 years ago I started
documenting my experiences to try to
figure out why what I found was that
something really beautiful was going on
this is almost poetic
these were really profound experiences
they were unexpected pleasures they were
genuine emotional connections they were
liberating moments so one day I was
standing on the corner waiting for the
light to change which I'm a New Yorker
so that means I was actually standing in
the street on the storm drain as if that
could get me across faster and there's
an old man standing next to me so he's
wearing like a long overcoat and sort of
an old man hat and he looked like
somebody from a movie and he says to me
don't stand there
you might disappear so this is absurd
right but I did what he said I step back
onto the sidewalk and he smiled and he
said could you never know I might have
turned around and Zoop you're gone this
was weird
and also really wonderful he was so warm
and he was so happy that he'd saved me
we had this little bond for a minute
I felt like my existence as a person had
been noticed and I was worth saving
the really sad thing is in many parts of
the world were raised to believe that
strangers are dangerous by default that
we can't trust them that they might hurt
us but most strangers aren't dangerous
we're uneasy around them because we have
no context we don't know what their
intentions are so instead of using our
perceptions and making choices we rely
on this category of stranger I have a
four year old when I say hello to people
on the street she asks me why she says
do we know them say no their neighbor
are they our friend no it's just good to
be friendly I think twice every time I
say that to her because I mean it but as
a woman particularly I know that not
every stranger on the street has the
best intentions it is good to be
friendly and it's good to learn when not
to be but none of that means we have to
be afraid there are two huge benefits to
using our senses instead of our fears
the first one is that it liberates us
when you think about it using perception
instead of categories is much easier
said than done
categories are something our brains use
when it comes to people it's sort of a
shortcut for learning about them we see
male female young old black brown white
stranger friend and we use the
information in that box quick it's easy
and it's a road to bias and it means
we're not thinking about people as
individuals I know an American
researcher who travels frequently
in Central Asia and Africa alone she's
entering into towns and cities as a
complete stranger
she has no bond no connections she's a
foreigner her survival strategy is this
yet one stranger to see you as a real
individual person if you can do that
it'll help other people see you that way
too
the second benefit of using our senses
has to do with intimacy I know it sounds
a little counterintuitive intimacy and
strangers but these quick interactions
can lead to a feeling that sociologists
call fleeting intimacy so it's a brief
experience that has emotional resonance
and meaning it's the good feeling I got
from being saved from the death trap of
the storm drain by the old man or how I
feel like part of a community when I
talk to somebody on my train on the way
to work sometimes it goes further
researchers have found that people often
feel more comfortable being honest and
open about their inner selves with
strangers than they do with their
friends and their families that they
often feel more understood by strangers
this gets reported in the media with
great lament strangers communicate
better than spouses it's a good headline
right I think it entirely misses the
point the important thing about these
studies is just how significant these
interactions can be how this special
form of closeness gives us something we
need as much as we need our friends and
our families so how is it possible that
we communicate so well with strangers
there are two reasons the first one is
that it's a quick interaction it has no
consequences it's easy to be honest with
someone you're never going to see again
right that makes sense the second reason
is where it gets more interesting we
have a bias when it comes to people were
close to
we expect them to understand us we
assume they do and we expect them to
read our minds so imagine you're at a
party and you can't believe that your
friend or your spouse isn't picking up
on it that you want to leave early and
you're thinking I gave you the look with
a stranger we have to start from scratch
we tell the whole story we explain you
to the people are how we feel about them
we spell out all the inside jokes and
guess what sometimes they do understand
us a little better okay so now that we
know that talking to strangers matters
how does it work
there are unwritten rules we tend to
follow the rules are very different
depending on what country you're in what
culture you're in in most parts of the
US the baseline expectation in public is
that we maintain a balance between
civility and privacy this is known as
civil inattention so imagine two people
are walking towards each other on the
street they'll glance at each other from
a distance
that's the civility the acknowledgement
and then as they get closer they'll look
away to give each other some space in
other cultures people go to
extraordinary lengths not to interact at
all people from Denmark tell me that
many Danes are so averse to talking to
strangers that they would rather miss
their stuff on the bus than say excuse
me to someone that they need to get
around so instead there's this elaborate
sort of shuffling of bags and using your
body to say that you need to get past
instead of using two words in Egypt I'm
told that it's rude to ignore a stranger
and that there's a remarkable culture of
hospitality strangers might ask each
other for a sip of water or if you ask
someone for directions they're very
likely to invite you home for coffee we
see these unwritten rules most clearly
when they're broken or
when you're in a new place and you're
trying to figure out what the right
thing to do is sometimes breaking the
rules a little bit is where the action
is in case it's not clear I really want
you to do this okay
so here's how it's going to go find
somebody who's making eye contact that's
a good signal the first thing is a
simple smile if you're passing somebody
on the street or in the hallway here
smile see what happens another is
triangulation there's you there's a
stranger there's some third thing that
you both might see and comment on like a
piece of public art or somebody
preaching in the street or somebody
wearing funny clothes give it a try make
a comment about that third thing and see
if it starts a conversation another is
what I call noticing this is usually
giving a compliment I'm a big fan of
noticing people's shoes I'm actually not
wearing fabulous shoes right now but
shoes are fabulous in general and
they're pretty neutral as far as giving
compliments go people always want to
tell you things about their awesome
shoes you may have already experienced
the dogs and babies principle so it can
be awkward to talk to someone on the
street you don't know how they're going
to respond but you can always talk to
their dog or their baby the dog or the
baby is a social conduit to the person
and you can tell by how they respond
whether they're open to talking more the
last one I want to challenge you to is
disclosure this is a very vulnerable
thing to do and it can be very rewarding
so next time you're talking to a
stranger and you feel comfortable tell
them something true about yourself
something really personal you might have
that experience I talked about of
feeling understood
sometimes in conversation it comes up
people ask me what does your dad do or
where does he live and sometimes I tell
them the whole truth which is that he
died when I was a kid always in those
moments
they share their own experiences of loss
we tend to meet disclosure with
disclosure even with strangers so here
it is when you talk to strangers you're
making beautiful interruptions into the
expected narrative of your daily life
and there's you're making unexpected
connections if you don't talk to
strangers you're missing out on all of
that we spend a lot of time teaching our
children about strangers what would
happen if we spend more time teaching
ourselves we could reject all the ideas
that make us so suspicious of each other
we could make a space for change thank
you